Proposal: More detailed description of PBR in glTF 2.0 (#1717)
KhronosGroup/glTF: specification/2.0/README.md

# Appendix B: BRDF Implementation

The metallic-roughness material model is a linear blend of two BRDFs, a metallic BRDF and a dielectric BRDF. The blending factor `metallic` describes the metalness of the material. The BRDFs share the parameters for roughness and base color, following [Burley (2012): Physically-Based Shading at Disney](https://disney-animation.s3.amazonaws.com/library/s2012_pbs_disney_brdf_notes_v2.pdf).

```
material = mix(dielectric_brdf, metal_brdf, metallic)
```

> The metal BRDF is based on a microfacet model which describes the orientation of microfacets on the surface as a statistical distribution. The distribution is controlled by a parameter called roughness, varying between 0 (smooth surface) and 1 (rough surface). As most microfacet distributions the blending between the two extremes does not behave linear, the material's `roughness` parameter is squared before using it as the distribution's roughness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metal BRDF is based on a microfacet model which describes the orientation of microfacets on the surface as a statistical distribution. The distribution is controlled by a parameter called roughness, varying between 0 (smooth surface) and 1 (rough surface). As the blending between the two extremes does not behave linearly, like most microfacet distributions, the material's `roughness` parameter is squared before using it as the distribution's roughness.
```

As a result, dielectric materials are modeled as a Fresnel-weighted combination of a microfacet BRDF, simulating the reflection at the surface, and a diffuse BRDF, simulating the transmitted portion of the light that is absorbed and scattered inside the object. The reflection roughness is given by the squared `roughness` of the material. The color of the diffuse BRDF comes from the `baseColor`. The amount of reflection compared to transmission is directional-dependent and as such determined by the Fresnel term. Its index of refraction is set to a fixed value of 1.5, a good compromise for the majority of opaque, dielectric materials.

```
dielectric_brdf =
  fresnel_mix(
    base = diffuse_brdf(baseColor),
    layer = specular_brdf(roughness^2),
    ior = 1.5)
```

The BRDFs and mixing operators used in the metallic-roughness material are summarized in the following image.

![](figures/pbr.png)

> The glTF spec is designed to allow applications to choose different lighting implementations based on their requirements. Some implementations may focus on an accurate simulation of light transport, others may choose to deliver real-time performance. Therefore, any implementation that adheres to the rules for mixing BRDFs is compliant to the glTF spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The glTF spec is designed to allow applications to choose different lighting implementations based on their requirements. Some implementations may focus on an accurate simulation of light transport while others may choose to deliver real-time performance. Therefore, any implementation that adheres to the rules for mixing BRDFs is comformant to the glTF spec.
```

Reviewer 2: I think it should be 'conformant'

Reviewer: Oops :)

In a physically-accurate light simulation, the BRDFs have to follow some basic principles: the BRDF has to be positive, reciprocal and energy conserving. This ensures that the visual output of the simulation is independent of the underlying rendering algorithm, as long as it is unbiased. The specification will provide a mathematical model that allows implementations to achieve an exact result in an unbiased renderer. Note that unbiased renderers may still decide to deviate from the specification to achieve better visual quality.

> The unbiased light simulation with physically realistic BRDFs will be the ground-truth for approximations in real-time renderers that are often biased, but still give visually pleasing results. Usually, these renderers take short-cuts to solve the rendering equation, like the split-sum approximation for image based lighting, or simplify the math to save instructions and reduce register pressure. However, there are many ways to achieve good approximations, depending on the platform (mobile or web applications, desktop applications on low or high-end hardware, VR) different constraints have to be taken into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unbiased light simulation with physically realistic BRDFs will be the ground-truth for approximations in real-time renderers that are often biased, but still give visually pleasing results. Usually, these renderers take shortcuts to solve the rendering equation, like the split-sum approximation for image based lighting, or simplify the math to save instructions and reduce register pressure. However, there are many ways to achieve good approximations, depending on the platform (mobile or web applications, desktop applications on low or high-end hardware, VR) different constraints have to be taken into account.
```

Author: Thanks a lot for the review and all the suggestions!

### Metal BRDF

The metallic reflection is modeled as a GGX microfacet BRDF with Schlick Fresnel term to configure the complex index of refraction via the `baseColor` of the material. The microfacet model lacks multiple scattering, resulting in high energy-loss with increased roughness. Accurate models to simulate multiple scattering are costly to compute. [Kulla and Conty (2017): Revisiting Physically Based Shading at Imageworks](https://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2017-shading-course/imageworks/s2017_pbs_imageworks_slides_v2.pdf) introduces an easy approximation of the effect that does not violate the mathematical properties of a BRDF and, thus, can be used in unbiased ray tracing and real-time rasterization.

```
metal_brdf =
  microfacet_brdf(alpha) * fresnel(HdotV, baseColor) +
  multiscatter_microfacet_brdf(alpha) * multiscatter_fresnel(baseColor)
```

The microfacet BRDF uses the GGX distribution and Smith height-correlated masking-shadowing term ([Heitz 2014: Understanding the Masking-Shadowing Function in Microfacet-Based BRDFs](http://jcgt.org/published/0003/02/03/paper.pdf)).

> An implementation sample is available at https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF-Sample-Viewer/ and provides an example of a WebGL implementation of a standard BRDF based on the glTF material parameters.

Author: You are right, the link to the sample viewer should definitely be kept. I added it back.

D = -- --------------------------------
    pi   (HdotN^2 * (alpha^2-1) + 1)^2

                                           2 * NdotV * NdotL
G = ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    NdotL * sqrt(NdotV^2 * (1-alpha^2) + alpha^2) + NdotV * sqrt(NdotL^2 * (1-alpha^2) + alpha^2))

> 

Author: Somehow I messed up the PR during an earlier rebase or merge. The parts following from here were broken. Should be fixed now.

```
metal_brdf =
  microfacet_brdf(alpha) * fresnel(HdotV, baseColor) +
  multiscatter_microfacet_brdf(alpha) * multiscatter_fresnel(baseColor)
```

The microfacet BRDF uses the GGX distribution and Smith height-correlated masking-shadowing term ([Heitz 2014: Understanding the Masking-Shadowing Function in Microfacet-Based BRDFs](http://jcgt.org/published/0003/02/03/paper.pdf)).

```
     1            alpha^2
D = -- --------------------------------
    pi   (HdotN^2 * (alpha^2-1) + 1)^2

                                           2 * NdotV * NdotL
G = ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    NdotL * sqrt(NdotV^2 * (1-alpha^2) + alpha^2) + NdotV * sqrt(NdotL^2 * (1-alpha^2) + alpha^2))

                         G * D
microfacet_brdf = --------------------
                    4 * NdotL * NdotV
```

The Schlick Fresnel is computed via the reflection half vector `H = normalize(V + L)`.

```
fresnel = baseColor + (1 - baseColor) * (1 - HdotV)^5
```

> The multi-scattering approximation uses the directional albedo `E_m` and average albedo `E_mavg` of the single-scattering model. These values are typically precomputed and fetched from a lookup table during rendering. The average Fresnel `F_mavg` for Schlick can be computed analytically.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit of a stumbling point for me.  Should we link to [Enterprise PBR Shading Model](https://dassaultsystemes-technology.github.io/EnterprisePBRShadingModel/spec-2021x.md.html#appendix/energycompensation) for background? Can we provide these precomputed lookup tables?  I see that your github provides these here:
[GGX_E](https://github.com/DassaultSystemes-Technology/EnterprisePBRShadingModel/blob/master/res/GGX_E.exr)
[GGX_E_avg](https://github.com/DassaultSystemes-Technology/EnterprisePBRShadingModel/blob/master/res/GGX_E_avg.exr)

It might also be worth mentioning the numerical fit described in [Energy Preservation](https://dassaultsystemes-technology.github.io/EnterprisePBRShadingModel/spec-2021x.md.html#components/core/in-depthlookatthebsdfs) for those who are willing to sacrifice energy conservation error in exchange for one less texture lookup into floating point texture lookups.

Reviewer 3: Worth noting that I came across this when trying to see how a new gltf material would be written, using this appendix as reference.  I really appreciate the well defined abstractions and diagrams that have been developed thus far; looking forward to seeing the final writeup!

Author: Not sure if we should link to specific implementation in the spec, is it possible to do that? I was also thinking about describing how to build the tables (similar to [this)](https://dassaultsystemes-technology.github.io/EnterprisePBRShadingModel/spec-2021x.md.html#appendix/energycompensation), but maybe that is too much detail and we should link to the [slides from Imageworks](https://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2017-shading-course/imageworks/s2017_pbs_imageworks_slides_v2.pdf) or [other implementation-independent sources](https://blog.selfshadow.com/2018/05/13/multi-faceted-part-1/). We could also put the tables into the glTF repo.

```

>                                 (1 - E_m(VdotN)) * (1 - E_m(LdotN))

Reviewer 3: Should `E_m(VdotN)` be `E_m(VdotN, alpha)` and `E_mavg` be `E_mavg(alpha)`?

Author: Yes, `E_m` and `E_mavg` depend on `alpha`. I omitted it here to improve readability, but it is confusing. I will add it. Thanks!

multiscatter_microfacet_brdf =  --------------------------------------------------
                                            pi * (1 - E_mavg(alpha))

           1                 20
F_mavg = ---- * baseColor + ----

>           21                 21

Reviewer 3: Is this equation correct or should it be 1/21 + 20/21 * baseColor?  Same below in the dielectric section.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

```
                 1
diffuse_brdf = ----
                pi
```

The Fresnel term in the mixing operation and its multi-scattering equivalent are now computed with the index of refraction, which is fixed at 1.5.

```
f0 = ((1-ior)/(1+ior))^2 = 0.04
fresnel = f0 + (1 - f0) * (1 - HdotV)^5

           1          20
F_mavg = ---- * f0 + ----
          21          21
```

An energy-conserving and energy-preserving coupling can be achieved via the same albedo-scaling technique as in the metal BRDF, as shown in [Kulla and Conty (2017): Revisiting Physically Based Shading at Imageworks](https://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2017-shading-course/imageworks/s2017_pbs_imageworks_slides_v2.pdf). 

The `fresnel_mix` operation weights the (multi-scatter) microfacet BRDF with the Fresnel term, and the diffuse BRDF  with `diffuse_weight`.

```
dielectric_brdf =
  diffuse_brdf() * diffuse_weight(VdotN, LdotN, f0) +
  microfacet_brdf(alpha) * fresnel(HdotV, f0) +
  multiscatter_microfacet_brdf(alpha) * multiscatter_fresnel(f0)

> ```

Reviewer 3: Is this equation correct? I don't see where baseColor factors into dielectric materials.  Is this f0 (0.04) or the full reflectance color (normal incidence angle)?

Author: In dielectric materials, baseColor defines the color of the diffuse component. It's missing in this equation, fixed it.

# Appendix B: BRDF Implementation

> The metallic-roughness material model is a linear blend of two BRDFs, a metallic BRDF and a dielectric BRDF. The blending factor `metallic` describes the metalness of the material. The BRDFs share the parameters for roughness and base color, following [Burley (2012): Physically-Based Shading at Disney](https://disney-animation.s3.amazonaws.com/library/s2012_pbs_disney_brdf_notes_v2.pdf).

Author: That's a very good idea, I added a few sentences that describe the motivation behind the blending and how to use it.

```
material = mix(dielectric_brdf, metal_brdf, metallic)
```

> The metal BRDF is based on a microfacet model which describes the orientation of microfacets on the surface as a statistical distribution. The distribution is controlled by a parameter called `roughness`, varying between 0 (smooth surface) and 1 (rough surface). As the blending between the two extremes does not behave linearly, like most microfacet distributions, the material's `roughness` parameter is squared before using it as the distribution's roughness.

Reviewer 4: I would describe the microfacet model separately since it is used by both metals and dielectrics. It is the Trowbridge-Reitz model (also known as GGX) where the microfacets are distributed on infinitesimal oblate ellipsoids, whose half-height in the normal direction is the `roughness^2` times the radius in the tangent plane. Roughness == 1 gives spheres, which result in uniform reflection in all directions, absent geometric shadowing. Geometric shadowing and multiscattering can be derived from this microfacet distribution, with common approximations given in the implementation section.

Author: Thanks a lot for that! I added it to the text.

Metallic surfaces reflect back most of the illumination, only a small portion of the light is absorbed by the material. This effect is described by the Fresnel term with the wavelength-dependent refractive index and extinction coefficient. To make parameterization simple, the metallic-roughness material combines the two quantities into a single, user-defined color value `baseColor` that defines the reflection color at normal incidence, also referred to as `f0`.

```
metal_brdf =

>   conductor_fresnel(

Author: All functions used in the pseudo-code are now defined in the non-normative implementation section.

where χ<sup>+</sup>(*x*) denotes the Heaviside function: 1 if *x* > 0 and 0 if *x* ≤ 0. See [Heitz (2014)](#Heitz2014) for a derivation of the formulas.

Introducing the visibility function

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle V = \frac{G}{4 \, \left| N \cdot L \right| \, \left| N \cdot V \right|}">

simplifies the original microfacet BRDF to

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle \text{MicrofacetBRDF} = V D">

with

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle V = \frac{\, \chi^%2B(H \cdot L)}{\left| N \cdot L\right| %2B \sqrt{\alpha^2 %2B (1 - \alpha^2) (N \cdot L)^2}} \frac{\, \chi^%2B(H \cdot V)}{\left| N \cdot V \right| %2B \sqrt{\alpha^2 %2B (1 - \alpha^2) (N \cdot V)^2}}">.

Thus we have the function

```
function specular_brdf(α) {
  return V * D
}
```

### Diffuse BRDF

The diffuse reflection `diffuse_brdf(color)` is a Lambertian BRDF

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle \text{LambertianBRDF} = \frac{1}{\pi}">

multiplied with the `color`.

```
function diffuse_brdf(color) {

>   return (1/pi) * color

Reviewer 4: This looks like only the D term; I believe you still need the G term multiplied here. Otherwise your diffuse is independent of light direction, and I don't think you're getting any diffuse reflection from light behind the tangent plane.

Reviewer 5: diffuse BRDF is `albedo/PI` the NdotL factor is to account for projected solid angle and is not part of the BRDF itself.

If however you are referencing with G to the microfacet masking function (i.e. Smith) then that would also be incorrect because G is only defined for a specific microfacet with a specific normal, which is only the case for consideration in specular BRDFs.

The only thing that makes sense here is a Heaviside function of `NdotL` but thats usually omitted because when you render in realtime by evaluating the BRDF at specific points, you take care not to evaluate for points outside the hemisphere (behind the tangent plane), and when you render with Monte Carlo or sampling methods, your sample generator should never produce such samples anyway.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, not sure I agree. I think the microfacet and shadowing model applies just as much to the diffuse as the specular, since shadowing stops grazing light from entering the surface at the place you expect. If you use a Heaviside (step) function instead of a smooth G, all that means is that a point light will produce a hard rather than soft shadow line for the colored reflection, which I don't think is a more accurate render. In any case, you said yourself that at least a Heaviside function is required here (which I would call an approximation of G), so either way I think it should be mentioned.

Author: `NdotL` is not part of the BRDF. The BRDF is defined as reflected differential radiance over differential incident irradiance. 

`NdotL` is part of the integral over all incoming light directions (upper hemisphere around the surface normal) which a renderer needs to solve to compute the outgoing radiance. I don't think it should be described here.

The Lambertian BRDF used here is the most simple BRDF possible, it's just a constant. A more realistic diffuse-like BRDF that fits into the microfacet framework is the Oren-Nayar BRDF. In this model, the facets are assumed to be Lambertian (as opposed to perfectly specular in the "typical" glossy microfacet models).

Reviewer 4: Ah, okay, I see my mistake now. So `material = ` means the material's BRDF. I think because I saw some `LdotH` terms in there that we were closer to light output. I think it might be nice to show the BRDF integral somewhere just to make it clear how to get all the way from input light to viewer pixel color. I looked up at the material section that references this appendix, and it doesn't define BRDF at all either.

Reviewer 5: > NdotL is not part of the BRDF. The BRDF is defined as reflected differential radiance over differential incident irradiance.

What I've said but more formally.

> The Lambertian BRDF used here is the most simple BRDF possible, it's just a constant. A more realistic diffuse-like BRDF that fits into the microfacet framework is the Oren-Nayar BRDF. In this model, the facets are assumed to be Lambertian (as opposed to perfectly specular in the "typical" glossy microfacet models).

Also Oren-Nayar assumes the V-cavities model, not GGX's NDF.

AFAIK, Oren-Nayar is not a closed form solution but rather a numerical fit of a simulation of such a microfacet model, correct me if I'm wrong

> Hmm, not sure I agree. I think the microfacet and shadowing model applies just as much to the diffuse as the specular, since shadowing stops grazing light from entering the surface at the place you expect. If you use a Heaviside (step) function instead of a smooth G, all that means is that a point light will produce a hard rather than soft shadow line for the colored reflection, which I don't think is a more accurate render. In any case, you said yourself that at least a Heaviside function is required here (which I would call an approximation of G), so either way I think it should be mentioned.

Like I said, if you assume microfacets to be anything other than perfectly smooth, your average microfacet reflection is not 1/PI anymore...

A perfectly smooth surface has no geometric shadowing, except by the tangent plane.

We can mention a heaviside function, but its not required in the reference implementation because of practicality:
1) No one will call the BRDF evaluation function when the observer is below the tangent plane (you'd be seeing the back face of a triangle, VdotN is negative) * actually for smooth shaded triangles, a `if (NdotV>0.0)` check would make sense.
2) No one will call the BRDF evaluation function when the surface is backfacing towards the light, people usually use a `max(NdotL,0.0)` outside the BRDF or an `if (NdotL>0.0)` before evaluating lighting

Changing the microfacet distribution to V-cavities necessitates you use Oren-Nayar, which already has the geometric shadowing baked into the fit AFAIK.

Using the same GGX distribution as specular introduces its own problems, mainly that such a diffuse BRDF has no closed solution and needs to be stochastically simulated with inifnite random walks like in Heitz's papers. and it seems there is no standardised numerical fit.

Also you need to decide whether the specular and diffuse distributions are in a coating or a fuzed substrate, basically:
1) is there a layer of coating (varnish) that has different microsurface on top and on bottom (uncorrelated microfacets from two layers)
2) are the individual microfacets all the same and exhibit specular and diffuse behaviour (correlated microfacet from pretty much a single layer)

For practicality, all the models I've seen even in offline rendering use option (1) where the two BRDFs are treated as separate physical layers.

}
```

### Diffuse BRDF

The diffuse reflection `diffuse_brdf(color)` is a Lambertian BRDF

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle \text{LambertianBRDF} = \frac{1}{\pi}">

multiplied with the `color`.

```
function diffuse_brdf(color) {
  return (1/pi) * color
}
```

### Fresnel

An inexpensive approximation for the Fresnel term that can be used for conductors and dielectrics was developed by [Schlick (1994)](#Schlick1994):

<img src="https://render.githubusercontent.com/render/math?math=\displaystyle F = f_0 %2B (1 - f_0) (1 - \left| V \cdot H \right| )^5">

The conductor Fresnel `conductor_fresnel(f0, bsdf)` applies a view-dependent tint to a BSDF:

```
function conductor_fresnel(f0, bsdf) {
  return bsdf * (f0 + (1 - f0) * (1 - abs(VdotH))^5)
}
```

For the dielectric BRDF a diffuse component `base` and a specular component `layer` are combined via `fresnel_mix(ior, base, layer)`. The `f0` color is now derived from the index of refraction `ior`.

```
function fresnel_mix(ior, base, layer) {
  f0 = ((1-ior)/(1+ior))^2
  fr = f0 + (1 - f0)*(1 - abs(VdotH))^5
  return mix(base, layer, fr)
}
```

### Metal BRDF and Dielectric BRDF

> Applying the functions we arrive at the metal BRDF and dielectric BRDF:

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that you are trying to build a bridge here between the old Appendix B content and this new formalization.  I think we are missing some details in this translation of the new representation of the brdf from the old representation.  For example, it's not clear here that 0.04 is the f0 when ior is 1.5.  Do we need to elaborate a bit more on why this section is here, and expand a bit more on how we arrive at the metal_brdf and dielectric_brdf?

Author: My idea was to first describe the material as a normative node graph (Section "Complete Model"), then give a non-normative (sample) implementation for the nodes (Sections "Specular BRDF", "Diffuse BRDF", "Fresnel"), and finally substitute all nodes in the graph for their implementations. This is how we arrive at the old (shader code) representation. I added some notes to the beginning of the "Metal BRDF and Dielectric BRDF" section to make the transition more smooth (hopefully). Does that help?
